.\" In .TH, FOO should be all caps, SECTION should be 1-8, maybe w/ subsection
.\" other parms are allowed: see man(7), man(1)
.\"
.\" This template provided by Tom Christiansen <tchrist@jhereg.perl.com>.
.\" 
.TH MOOSE 7 
.SH NAME
MOOSE, Multiscale Object-Oriented Simulation Environment \- A simulator for 
systems biology and computational neuroscience.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B moose
[
.I scriptfile
]
[
.I args...
]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.\" Putting a newline after each sentence can generate better output.
MOOSE is a general simulator for computational neuroscience and systems 
biology. It is backward compatible with GENESIS, and forward compatible with
Python scripting and multiple solution engines.
.SS "Web pages"
Home page: 
.I http://moose.ncbs.res.in
.br
SourceForge page:
.I http://moose.sourceforge.net
.SS "Installation for Debian/Ubuntu systems"
Download the .deb file. 
Use 
.B dpkg -i packagename.deb
to install it.
Later we will try to get it into the Debian 
repositories so it will be seen by the regular system update tools.
The default installation puts the binaries into 
.I /usr/bin
, the docs and examples scripts in
.I /usr/share/doc/moose 
A copy of the docs and example scripts is also created in the user's home
directory. This is because many of these scripts write out files, and are meant
to be edited by the user.
On a single-user Ubuntu machine, this location is 
.I /home/<user>/moose.
On an administered workstation this may be in 
.I /root/moose.
The sysadmin will
then have to copy the directory over for each of the users.
.SS "Installation on Red Hat/Fedora systems"
Download the .rpm file. Use rpm -i packagename.rpm.
The default installation puts the binaries into /usr/bin, the docs and 
example scripts in /usr/share/doc/moose.
These files should be copied over to the users's home directory.
This is because many of these scripts write out files, and are meant
to be edited by the user.
.SS "Installation on Macintosh systems"
Download the .pkg file. Double click the file and follow the instructions.
The default installation puts the binaries into /usr/local/bin, the docs and 
example scripts in /usr/local/share/doc/moose.
These files should be copied over to the users's home directory.
This is because many of these scripts write out files, and are meant
to be edited by the user.
.SS "Other systems"
Look in the RELEASE_NOTES file in your moose directory described above,
or on the web page.
.SH ERRORS
MOOSE emits various diagnostics when it croaks. Often these will help us
debug it, if you can send them back to the MOOSE sourceforge site at
.I http://sourceforge.net/tracker/?group_id=165660&atid=836272
.SH EXAMPLES
When MOOSE is run from the command line without any arguments, it starts
up an interactive shell with the GENESIS interpreter:
.br
.B moose
.P
When MOOSE has a filename argument (typically with a .g suffix) it treats
that as a GENESIS script file:
.br
.B cd DEMOS/squid-ee
.br
.B moose Squid.g

This will start up the squid tutorial, and dump the output in a text file
named
.I squid.moose.plot
.br
.SS PyMOOSE 
PyMOOSE is a python module for MOOSE. You can import moose in a python 
script and the MOOSE classes will be available to you. Sample scripts
are located in the DEMOS/pymoose directory.

.B cd DEMOS/pymoose/squid
.br
.B python squid.py

This will run the squid example and dump the output in
testSquidXyz.plot in the same directory, where Xyz is the name of the
parameter (GNa, GK, Vm, Ik, etc.).

.br
.SH FILES
MOOSE does not need any additional files to run, unlike GENESIS. 
Standard locations on a Linux system are:
.br
.nf
.\" set tabstop to longest possible filename, plus a wee bit
.ta \w'/usr/lib/perl/getopts.pl   'u
\fI/usr/bin/moose\fR	MOOSE binaries
\fI/usr/share/doc/moose\fR	unformatted programmer documentation
In addition the 
.I moose
directory should be located in the user's home directory. This contains
assorted files for documentation, examples, tests and so on.
.br
Unfortunately this beta release does not have much by way of user
documentation. Please refer to the GENESIS manual and book for the old
GENESIS compatible syntax, which works in most of the core commands.

.SH NOTES
MOOSE is licenced under the LGPL. The details are in the COPYING.LIB file.
In general, you can read the code, modify it with attribution, and use it for
all sorts of things. None of these uses have any warranty whatsoever.
However, MOOSE interfaces with other code that
may have a more restrictive licence, in which case the more restrictive terms
may apply. For example, the GNU scientific library is licensed under the GPL.
.SH CAVEATS
This is the beta 1.1.0 version, which means it is beta than the 1.0.0 but
still has a way to go.
.SH BUGS
Lots of things! Please give bug reports to 
.I http://sourceforge.net/tracker/?group_id=165660&atid=836272
.br
or to the people listed at the moose or sourceforge sites.
.SH RESTRICTIONS
The GENESIS parser (SLI) is a backward-compatibility feature. While new objects
are likely to be added, and will become visible through the parser, we don't
plan to do much significant development on the GENESIS SLI, and it will
eventually be deprecated.
.SH AUTHORS
.br
.nf
.\" set tabstop to longest possible filename, plus a wee bit
.ta \w'/usr/lib/perl/getopts.pl   'u
\fIUpi Bhalla\fR	Architect, kinetics, parallel stuff
\fISubhasis Ray\fR	PyMOOSE
\fINiraj Dudani\fR	Compartmental neuronal solver
\fIRaamesh Deshpande\fR	Array elements
\fISiji George\fR	Release management
.br
We also acknowledge input from the CRL team led by Parag Chandragupta who
did initial parallelization work, and Johannes Hjorth, who contributed
some objects and is helping with the MUSIC port.
.br
Support is from many sources, including NCBS, the DAE and DBT (India), the
NIH and a long-standing collaboration with Ravi Iyengar at Mount Sinai,
and the EU-India grid project.
.SH HISTORY
MOOSE was inspired by the GENESIS neuronal simulator and still retains its
parser. MOOSE has been in development in various forms for several years,
but the work on SourceForge dates from 2006.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.\" Always quote multiple words for .SH
Other cool simulators:
.BR GENESIS ,
.BR NEURON ,
.BR Smoldyn ,
.BR COPASI .
