\input texinfo   @c -*-texinfo-*-
@comment $Id$
@comment %**start of header
@setfilename pymoose.info
@settitle PyMOOSE: Python module for MOOSE Simulation 
@syncodeindex pg cp
@c footnotestyle separate
@c paragraphindent 2
@comment %**end of header
@copying 
This manual is for MOOSE (version 1.3 ),
The Multiscale Object-Oriented Simulation Environment.

Copyright @copyright{} 2010 Subhasis Ray, Upinder Bhalla and National
Centre for Biological Sciences, TIFR, Bellary Road, Bangalore 560065,
INDIA.

@quotation
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.2 or
any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with no
Invariant Sections, with no Front-Cover Texts and no Back-Cover Texts. A
copy of the license is included in the section entitled ``GNU Free
Documentation License.''
@end quotation
@end copying

@dircategory Science
@direntry
* PyMOOSE: (pymoose).   Python module for MOOSE Simulation.
@end direntry

@titlepage
@title PyMOOSE
@subtitle Python module for MOOSE Simulation
@subtitle Version 1.3
@author Subhasis Ray (@email{subhasis@@ncbs.res.in})
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@contents

@c Use @ifinfo _and_ @ifhtml here because Texinfo 3 cannot cope with
@c @ifnottex around a top node.
@ifinfo
@node top
@top PyMOOSE

This manual is for MOOSE (version 1.3).

It contains an overview of how to use MOOSE as a Python module to setup
and run simulations. It also supplements as a reference manual
describing the classes of objects in MOOSE.

@insertcopying
@end ifinfo
@ifhtml
@node top
@top PyMOOSE

This manual is for MOOSE (version 1.3).


@insertcopying
@end ifhtml

@iftex
@unnumbered Executive Summary
@end iftex

It contains an overview of how to use MOOSE as a Python module to setup
and run simulations. It also supplements as a reference manual
describing the classes of objects in MOOSE.

@menu
* Copying::             Copying
* Introduction::        Introduction to MOOSE and PyMOOSE
* Installation::        Installing (Py)MOOSE
* Quick Start::         Quick Start
* Detailed Guide::      In-Depth Guide to PyMOOSE
* FAQ::                 Frequently Asked Questions
* Index::               Index 
@end menu

@node Copying
@unnumbered Copying
The copyright notice for this manual is:

@insertcopying

The full license text can be read here:
@menu
* GNU Free Documentation License::      License for copying this manual.
@end menu

@include fdl.texi

@node Introduction
@chapter Introduction to MOOSE and PyMOOSE
Yet to be written.
@pindex Introduction
@cindex Introduction

@include install.texi

@include quickstart.texi

@include detailed.texi

@include faq.texi


@node Index
@unnumbered Index

@printindex cp

@bye
